Azure AI auth for .NET overview (#41587)
dotnet/docs: docs/ai/azure-ai-services-authentication.md

- **Key-based authentication** provides access to an Azure service using secret key values. These secret values are sometimes known as API keys or access keys depending on the service.
- **Microsoft Entra ID** provides a comprehensive identity and access management solution to ensure that the correct identities have the correct level of access to different Azure resources.

The sections ahead provide conceptual overviews for these two approaches, rather than detailed implementation steps. For more detailed information about connecting to Azure services, visit the following resources:

- [Authenticate .NET apps to Azure services](/dotnet/azure/sdk/authentication/)
- [Identity fundamentals](/entra/fundamentals/identity-fundamental-concepts)
- [What is Azure RBAC?](/azure/role-based-access-control/overview)

> [!NOTE]
> The examples in this article focus primarily on connections to Azure OpenAI, but the same concepts and implementation steps directly apply to many other Azure AI Services as well.

## Authentication using keys

> Access keys allow apps and tools to authenticate to an Azure AI service such as OpenAI using a secret key provided by the service. Retrieve the secret key using tools such as the Azure Portal or Azure CLI and use it to configure your app code to connect to the AI service:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Access keys allow apps and tools to authenticate to an Azure AI service, such as Azure OpenAI, using a secret key provided by the service. Retrieve the secret key using tools such as the Azure portal or Azure CLI and use it to configure your app code to connect to the AI service:
```

```csharp
builder.Services.AddAzureOpenAIChatCompletion(
    "deployment-model",
    "service-endpoint",
    "service-key"); // Secret key
var kernel = builder.Build();
```

> Using keys is a straightforward option, but this approach should be used with caution. Keys aren't the recommended authentication option for the following reasons:
> 
> - Keys don't follow [the principle of least privilege](/entra/identity-platform/secure-least-privileged-access)—they provide elevated permissions regardless of who uses them or for what task.
> - Keys can accidentally be checked into source control or stored in unsafe locations.
> - Keys can easily be shared with or sent to parties who shouldn't have access.
> - Keys often require manual administration and rotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using keys is a straightforward option, but this approach should be used with caution. Keys aren't the recommended authentication option because they:

- Don't follow [the principle of least privilege](/entra/identity-platform/secure-least-privileged-access)—they provide elevated permissions regardless of who uses them or for what task.
- Can accidentally be checked into source control or stored in unsafe locations.
- Can easily be shared with or sent to parties who shouldn't have access.
- Often require manual administration and rotation.
```

Instead, consider using [Microsoft Entra ID](/#explore-microsoft-entra-id) for authentication, which is the recommended solution for most scenarios.

## Authentication using Microsoft Entra ID

Microsoft Entra ID is a cloud-based identity and access management service that provides a vast set of features for different business and app scenarios. Microsoft Entra ID is the recommended solution to connect to Azure OpenAI and other AI services and provides the following benefits:

- Key-less authentication using [identities](/entra/fundamentals/identity-fundamental-concepts).
- Role-based-access-control (RBAC) to assign identities the minimum required permissions.

> - Detects [different credentials across environments](/dotnet/api/azure.identity.defaultazurecredential) without requiring code changes.

Reviewer: Make it clearer that it's the Azure Identity library that provides this feature

- Automatically handles administrative maintenance tasks such as rotating underlying keys.

The workflow to implement Microsoft Entra authentication in your app generally includes the following:

- Local development:
    1. Sign-in to Azure using a local dev tool such as the Azure CLI or Visual Studio.
    1. Configure your code to use the [`Azure.Identity`](/dotnet/api/overview/azure/identity-readme) client library and `DefaultAzureCredential` class.
    1. Assign Azure roles to the account you signed-in with to enable access to the AI service.

- Azure-hosted app:
    1. Deploy the app to Azure after configuring it to authenticate using the `Azure.Identity` client library.
    1. Assign a [managed identity](/entra/identity/managed-identities-azure-resources/overview) to the Azure-hosted app.
    1. Assign Azure roles to the managed identity to enable access to the AI service.

The key concepts of this workflow are explored in the following sections.

### Authenticate to Azure locally

> When developing apps locally that connect to Azure AI Services, authenticate to Azure using a tool such as Visual Studio or the Azure CLI. Your local credentials can be discovered by the `Azure.Identity` client library and used to authenticate your app to Azure services, as described in the [Configure the app code](/#configure-your-app-code) section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When developing apps locally that connect to Azure AI services, authenticate to Azure using a tool such as Visual Studio or the Azure CLI. Your local credentials can be discovered by the `Azure.Identity` client library and used to authenticate your app to Azure services, as described in the [Configure the app code](/#configure-your-app-code) section.
```

Assign roles such as **Cognitive Services OpenAI User** (role ID: `5e0bd9bd-7b93-4f28-af87-19fc36ad61bd`) to the relevant identity using tools such as the Azure CLI, Bicep, or the Azure Portal. For example, use the `az role assignment create` command to assign a role using the Azure CLI:

```azurecli
az role assignment create \
        --role "5e0bd9bd-7b93-4f28-af87-19fc36ad61bd" \
        --assignee-object-id "$PRINCIPAL_ID" \
        --scope /subscriptions/"$SUBSCRIPTION_ID"/resourceGroups/"$RESOURCE_GROUP" \
        --assignee-principal-type User
```

Learn more about Azure RBAC using the following resources:

- [What is Azure RBAC?](/azure/role-based-access-control/overview)
- [Grant a user access](/azure/role-based-access-control/quickstart-assign-role-user-portal)
- [RBAC best practices](/azure/role-based-access-control/best-practices)

### Assign a managed identity to your app

> In most scenarios, Azure hosted applications should use a [managed identity](/entra/identity/managed-identities-azure-resources/overview) to connect to other services such as Azure OpenAI. Managed identities provide an fully managed identity in Microsoft Entra ID for applications to use when connecting to resources that support Microsoft Entra authentication. `DefaultAzureCredential` discovers the identity associated with your app and uses it to authenticate to other Azure services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In most scenarios, Azure-hosted apps should use a [managed identity](/entra/identity/managed-identities-azure-resources/overview) to connect to other services such as Azure OpenAI. Managed identities provide a fully managed identity in Microsoft Entra ID for apps to use when connecting to resources that support Microsoft Entra authentication. `DefaultAzureCredential` discovers the identity associated with your app and uses it to authenticate to other Azure services.
```
